---
math: yes
title: "Lecture 3"
categories: ["MAT1340 - College Algebra", "Week 2"]
tags: [lecture]
description:
---

## Domain Issues

The two problem--causing things to look out for when evaluating the domain of functions are

1. Division by zero $\longrightarrow \frac{1}{0}$,
2. Negative numbers under square roots $\longrightarrow \sqrt{-4}$.

So, when looking at a function, we can quickly scan for fractions and radicals ($\sqrt[n]{}$). If we see neither, we can breathe a sigh of relief, since there aren't any problem--causing things!

#### Issues with division by zero

However, if we see a fraction with a variable (like $x$) in the denominator, then we know that there might be a value of $x$ which causes us to divide by zero.

First, let's think about *why* we can't divide by zero. If we can divide by any other number, why does zero cause such an issue? It's good to first think about the simplest case of a variable in the denominator:

$$
\frac{1}{x}
$$

What happens if we make $x$ smaller? Say we let $x=0.5$, and then $x=0.25$, and then $x=0.125$, and so on:

$$
{\color{red}\frac{1}{0.5}} \rightarrow {\color{green}\frac{1}{0.25}} \rightarrow {\color{teal}\frac{1}{0.125}} \rightarrow \cdots
$$

If we actually divide these out, the sequence would become

$$
{\color{red}2} \rightarrow {\color{green}4} \rightarrow {\color{teal}8} \rightarrow \cdots
$$

In general, as we make $x$ smaller, $\frac{1}{x}$ becomes bigger. So, it might be natural to say that $\frac{1}{0}$ should be $\infty$. But we need to consider the case of negative numbers. Let's look at the same sequence, but with negative $x$ values:

$$
{\color{red}\frac{1}{-0.5}} \rightarrow {\color{green}\frac{1}{-0.25}} \rightarrow {\color{teal}\frac{1}{-0.125}} \rightarrow \cdots
$$

These fractions evaluate to

$$
{\color{red}-2} \rightarrow {\color{green}-4} \rightarrow {\color{teal}-8} \rightarrow \cdots
$$

These numbers are getting smaller (more negative)! If $\frac{1}{0}$ were truly $\infty$, then these numbers would be getting bigger. Since the value of $\frac{1}{0}$ does not converge on either $\infty$ or $-\infty$, we say that the value of $\frac{1}{0}$ is **undefined**.

Here's a graph of $\frac{1}{x}$ to make this clearer.

{% include desmos.html hash="9rgevcd6ke" %}

So, all of this is to say that if $x$ --- or any variable --- is in the denominator, there may be issues with our domain. Let's work through an example.

#### Example Problem

> Find the domain, in interval notation, of the rational function
>
> $$
> f(x)=\frac{x+3}{6-x}
> $$
{: .prompt-warning }

So, first we should look at the overall equation. Are there fractions? Are there square roots?

Well, yes, there is a fraction, and even worse, it has $x$ in the denominator. So we know that there may be issues for the domain of the function. But how can we find the value of $x$ where such domain issues may exist?

It might seem counter--intuitive, but setting the denominator *equal* to zero (the exact thing we don't want to happen) will actually allow us to see exactly where the issues lie:

$$
\begin{align*}
6-x &= 0 \\
-x &= -6 \\
x &= 6
.\end{align*}
$$

Because the denominator equals zero when $x=6$, we know that the domain of our function does not include $x=6$.

So, for the above example, the set, interval, and inequality notation would look like

$$
\begin{gather*}
\{x \in \mathbb{R}, \; x \neq 6 \} \\
(-\infty, 6) \cup (6, \infty) \\
x < 6 \; \text{and} \; x > 6
.\end{gather*}
$$

## Functions with Radicals

Although radicals ($\sqrt{x}$) might look weird or intimidating, they're really just powers. For example, the square root of $x$, which looks like $\sqrt{x}$, is the exact same as raising $x$ to the power of $\frac{1}{2}$:

$$
\sqrt{x} = x^{\frac{1}{2}}
$$

As most of you know, if you take an exponential expression like $x^3$ and raise that whole thing to another power, you can simply multiply the powers to find the equivalent power of $x$:

$$
\left( x^3 \right)^3 = x^{3 \cdot 3} = x^{9}
$$

Kind of similar is when you are just multiplying exponential expressions:

$$
x^3 \cdot x^3 = x^{3+3} = x^{6}
$$

All of this is to point out the reason why $\left( \sqrt{x} \right)^2 = x$. If we think about the above facts, we can see that

$$
(\sqrt{x})^2 = (x^{\frac{1}{2}})^2 = x^{\frac{1}{2} \cdot 2} = x^{1} = x
$$

Domain issues can crop up with radicals very easily. For example, consider the function

$$
f(x) = \sqrt{x+3}
$$

We know that the argument of the square root (argument $=$ expression inside the $\sqrt{}$, in this case, $x+3$) cannot be a negative number, as that would result in a nonreal number. So, in order to find the domain of a function with a radical, we can simply set the argument to be greater than or equal to zero, similar to how we set the denominator of a rational function equal to zero:

$$
\begin{align*}
x+3 \ge 0 \\
x \ge -3
.\end{align*}
$$

So, we know that $x$ must be greater than or equal to $-3$ in order for our function to spit out a real answer. Therefore, the domain of the function $f(x)=\sqrt{x+3}$ is

$$
[-3, \infty)
$$

## Piecewise Functions

Piecewise functions look a lot more intimidating than they really are. You can think about it this way: a piecewise function is just a function which uses different equations depending on what value of $x$ you want to consider.

For example, if I were running a convenience store, I might list a certain item as buy two, get one free. So, as the clerk, I would evaluate the customer's input $x$ (which would be the number of items they're buying) to see if they meet the criteria for the deal. If they were buying greater than or equal to two items, I'd give them an extra one for free. Otherwise, I'd charge them full price.

Expressed as a piecewise function, the above example would look like the following. I'll assume that the item is worth \$1.

$$
f(x) = 

\begin{cases}
x & \text{if} \; x < 2 \\
x - 1 & \text{if} \; x \ge 2
\end{cases}
$$

To create a piecewise function on Desmos, we can type in the following format:

$$
f(x) = \{\text{condition}:\text{equation}, \; \text{condition}:\text{equation}, \; \ldots\}
$$

So, for the above example (convenience store), we could type into Desmos:

$$
f(x) = \{ x < 2:x,\;x \ge 2:x-1 \}
$$

{% include desmos.html hash="n1vvyfssxh" %}

## Summary

> **Summary**: Domain issues arise mainly from
> 1. Division by zero (denominators that equal 0),
> 2. Even roots of negative numbers (e.g., $\sqrt{-4}$).
    - Rational functions: exclude $x$ values that make the denominator zero.
    - Radical functions: require the inside of the radical (the argument) to be nonnegative, so set the argument $\ge 0$ and solve for $x$.
    - Piecewise functions: are built from different formulas depending on the input value of $x$. They look complicated, but each piece is just a normal function applied under certain conditions.
>
> In short: when evaluating a function’s domain, scan for fractions and radicals first.
> If they’re present, check for division by zero or negative square roots. If not, the domain is usually all real numbers.
{: .prompt-tip }
