---
math: yes
title: "Title"
categories: ["MAT1340 - College Algebra", "Week 5"]
tags: [lecture]
---

## Inverse Functions (Cont.)

Finding the inverse ($f^{-1}(x)$) of a more complicated function like

$$
f(x)=\frac{3x+2}{x+5}
$$

can be daunting, but the process stays the exact same: replace $f(x)$ with $y$, swap the $x$s and $y$ variables, and then solve for $y$. Let's solve the above equation for its inverse:

$$
\begin{align}
f(x) &= \frac{3x+2}{x+5} \\
y &= \frac{3x+2}{x+5} \\
x &= \frac{3y+2}{y+5}
.\end{align}
$$

$(2)$: replaced $f(x)$ with $y$.

$(3)$: swapped the $x$s and $y$s.

So, now we need to solve for $y$:

$$
\begin{align*}
x &= \frac{3y+2}{y+5} \\
x \left( y+5 \right) &= 3y+2 \\
xy+5x &= 3y+2 \\
5x &= 3y+2-xy \\
5x - 2 &= 3y-xy \\
5x-2 &= y(3-x) \\
\frac{5x-2}{3-x} &= y \\
y &= \frac{5x-2}{3-x}
.\end{align*}
$$

Finally, we can then replace $y$ with $f^{-1}(x)$:

$$
\boxed{f^{-1}(x)=\frac{5x-2}{3-x}}
$$

Below is the graph of both functions, $f(x)$ in red and $f^{-1}(x)$ in blue. The two moving points show the symmetry about the dotted black line $y=x$.
> *Note: if you are viewing in dark mode, the colors are inverted.*
>
{% include desmos.html hash="lkul3x9fdc" %}

It's nice to learn about quadratics and their properties, but you might ask "whats the point?" or "when would I use this math in real life?" Well, it turns out that quadratics are useful in many contexts. Let's think about a question which doesn't seem to be related at first:

> The width of a rectangle is $3$ units less than the length. The area of the rectangle is $28$ square units. What is the length, in units, of the rectangle?
{: .prompt-warning }

We can start by setting up what the problem is telling us in a mathematical way. We know that the width $w$ is $3$ units less than the length $l$:

$$
\begin{align*}
w-3 &= l \\
w &= l+3
.\end{align*}
$$

We also know that the area of the rectangle is $28$ square units:

$$
w \cdot l = 28
$$

So, what now? Well, we know that $w=l+3$, so let's sub that in for $w$ in our second equation:

$$
\begin{align*}
w \cdot l &= 28 \\
\left( l+3 \right) \cdot l &= 28 \\
\end{align*}
$$

We can distribute the $l$:

$$
\begin{align*}
l^2+3l &= 28 \\
l^2+3l-28 &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

Suddenly, we have found a quadratic from a seemingly unrelated problem! To find $l$, we can just solve for $l$:

$$
\begin{align*}
l^2+3l-28 &= 0 \\
\left(l-4\right) \left(l+7\right) &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

So we know that, based on our factoring, $l$ must be $4$ or $-7$. But let's think about what this result means: can our length be $-7$? That doesn't make sense. In other words, $-7$ is an extraneous solution.

So, our length of the rectangle has to be $4$ units.

Determine what $f(x)$ is doing as $x\to \infty$ and $x\to -\infty$
{% include desmos.html hash="pjj5gcifle" %}
